okay good evening I want to Welcome to
the Pennsylvania county December regular
school board meet it's hard to believe
we've reached the end of a calendar year
already and half of the school year
because it seems like we just started
and here we are halfway through
so I do hope that each and every one has
a good holiday break
on another week or so we'll be getting
out for holiday break and I hope that
everyone has a nice relaxation and has
good family time
um we have a few things from clothes to
take care of so at this time I'd like to
ask for a roll call please let's think
up
it's Burton
aye Mr Henderson aye Ms Merricks Mr
Mills here Mr Moon Mr Doss here I need
to reconvene from closed and certifying
related action items from clothes please
so moved
roll call please Mr Burton aye Mr
Fitzgerald aye Mr Henderson aye Ms
Merricks Mr Mills aye Mr Moon Mr Doss uh
motions from close please
motion for case a to expel a student
with offer of continuing Educational
Services to be provided by the regional
alternative school through laptop
services
second is there any discussion
no call please
Mr Burton Mr Fitzgerald aye Mr Henderson
aye Ms Merricks Mr Mills aye Mr Moon Mr
dolls
Kate all in favor
case b is motion to expel without
replacement at the regional alternative
school for continuing Educational
Services required the student to
complete the third millennium program
within six weeks
so move
like
any further discussion
roll call please Mr Burton aye Mr
Fitzgerald aye Mr Henderson aye Ms
Merricks Mr Mays aye Mr Moon Mr Dallas
uh
and we have a motion to waive School
Board policy gbo retirement for Mr Lewis
depaolo to allow him to retire under the
early retirement incentive program
effective December 31 2022.
so moved second
any further discussion
roll call please Mr Burton Mr Fitzgerald
aye Mr Henderson aye Ms max Mr Mays aye
Mr Moon Mr dolls
we have a motion to accept the
certification of the superintendent
indicating that Miss Portia Fitzgerald
is a qualified applicant and that no
school board member had any involvement
with this Personnel recommendation and
certification from Mr Willie Fitzgerald
that he had no involvement in the hiring
decision and approved the employment of
Miss Portia Fitzgerald as a church-based
tutor as recommended
I said the fact that I had no
involvement
do I have a motion
it's like okay roll call please
Mr Burton aye Mr Fitzgerald
I'm staying
Mr Henderson
aye Ms Merricks aye Mr Mills aye Mr Moon
and Mr Doss aye
we have a motion to approve Personnel
changes for December 13 2022 as
presented
so move one second
any discussion
roll call please Mr Burton aye Mr
Fitzgerald aye Mr Henderson aye Ms
Merricks Mr Mills aye Mr Moon Mr dolls
aye Mr Mayhew do you see if any of those
applicants were in the room tonight any
new employees
in okay
that's all okay that's all of the closed
session items we'll move on to the Open
Session
um first we need to approve the agenda
are there any additions to the agenda
yes sir who we approved it presented
second
in any discussion
Pro call please Mr Burton aye Mr
Fitzgerald aye Mr Henderson aye Ms
Merricks Mr mayles aye Mr Moon aye Mr
dolls aye consent agenda
move we approved
second
any discussion on it
okay no call please Mr Burton aye Mr
Fitzgerald aye Mr Henderson aye Miss
Merricks aye Mr Mills aye Mr Moon Mr
Dawes all right this time we'll go to
the Public Presentation and
announcements the first thing we want to
recognize is some students Miss rigney
who's doing that Miss Patty yeah
Miss Patty they CTE students
CTE students okay
chairman Doss school board members Dr
Jones good evening it is my pleasure to
recognize three students from Chatham
High School principal Jason Reese
assistant principal Angela underpant
will be joining me for this recognition
would you please come forward
the first student I will recognize and
also I would like for our sponsors FFA
agriculture teachers to please come up
um Mr Jason ince is with us Mrs Cassidy
Shelton was unable to join us this
evening
thank you so much
first
this certificate of excellence is
presented to Nicholas Doolin and
Nicholas is working this evening and can
join us so Mr ince will accept his
certificate and it reads in recognition
and appreciation for outstanding
achievement for placing third and small
engine troubleshooting at the state FFA
convention granted this 13th day of
December 2022 by the Pennsylvania County
School Board Calvin dolls chairman Don
Moon Vice chairman
and congratulations to
Nicholas Doolin in his absence
[Applause]
[Music]
next I would like to recognize Nathan
Paris
this certificate of excellence is
presented to Nathan Paris
in recognition and appreciation for
outstanding achievement for placing
third in Agri science at the National
FFA convention granted this 13th day of
December by the Pennsylvania County
School board chairman Doss and vice
chairman Moon
congratulations Nathan
[Applause]
[Music]
again congratulations Nathan
[Applause]
next I like to recognize Grace Stowe
this certificate of excellence is
presented to Grace Stowe in recognition
and appreciation for outstanding
achievement for placing second in Creed
speaking at the National FFA convention
granted this 13th day of December 2022
by the Pennsylvania County School board
chairman Dawson Vice chairman Moon
congratulations Grace
[Applause]
[Music]
again congratulations Grace and
congratulations to all of our students
who were recognized that the FFA
convention
it's always an honor to
to have our students come and to present
to them and for them to go compete and
ask me like they do so thank you for the
the teacher thank you for all the work
you've done and for the School Chatham
High School thank y'all
thank you
Miss Patty you're going to recognize a
yes sir
our next recognition is also Chatham
High School and Mr Dawes I would like
for you and Dr Jones to also join us
[Laughter]
and Miss andreapon assistant principal
Chatham High School on behalf of Mr
Jason Reese
it is my pleasure to recognize science
teacher
Mrs Tara Stafford would you please come
forward
science teacher at Chatham High School
[Applause]
[Music]
each year student members of The
National Society of High School Scholars
are invited to nominate the educator who
has made the most significant
contribution to their academic career
for the Clays Nobel educator of
Distinction award this honor recognizes
exemplary Educators whose passion and
devotion inspired their students to grow
and develop as Scholars leaders and
citizens
educators of Distinction are invited to
attend the society's free member events
around the country and are recognized
with a personalized certificate
presented in honor of the National
Society of High School Scholars founder
Clay's Nobel
educators of Distinction are also
eligible to compete for the National
Society of High School Scholars educator
of the Year award
Ms Tara Stafford
science educator at Chatham High School
was recently selected as a Clays Nobel
educator of Distinction by The National
Society of High School Scholars
a role model to people's Tara was
nominated by a student for outstanding
dedication and commitment to Excellence
in the profession
I like to present you with this
certificate
it reads the certificate of excellence
is presented to Tara Stafford in
recognition and appreciation for
outstanding achievement for being
selected as a Clays Nobel educator of
Distinction by The National Society of
High School Scholars granted this 13th
day of December 2022 by the Pennsylvania
County School Board Mr Calvin Dawes
chairman Mr Don Moon Vice chairman
congratulations Mrs Stafford
[Music]
again congratulations
[Applause]
foreign
okay we next we have the public input
for the 23-24 budget
is there any sign ups
no one signed up to speak okay we'll
move on then to the next one which is
character word of the month it's higher
some top story
and the character word is courtesy
good evening everyone
courtesy is defined as the showing of
one's politeness in one's attitude and
behavior towards others in other words
being courteous is simply just being
polite and respectful
this generation is lacking in courtesy
but there are some simple fixes
holding the door for others saying yes
ma'am or yes sir I am raising your hand
in class are simple ways to just be
courteous
it is something we should all work
towards because you never know whose day
you might have made better or an impact
you've had on someone just for being
courteous
thank you thank you
next we had the Pennsylvania County
Education Association I see the other Dr
Jones in the back
you ready for Christmas
it's coming whether you're ready or not
have I bet
I always got to be ready
dolls
good evening superintendent Jones
chairman
central office staff my colleagues
students and all those in attendance in
person as well as online I want to say
good evenings greetings and blessings
and salutations I hope that you all are
ready for the upcoming season because as
chairman Dawson said is ready if you are
not
uh with that being said I do want to do
a bit of reflection the last time I
stood here we were hearken upon American
Education week and I know some of y'all
were able to get out into the schools or
at least talk to some of the folks
across the county and I would love to
hear your experiences if you're willing
to share what you were able to see or or
experience or even be able to engage
with so I'm going to pause for a minute
of my time and yield it to y'all to
share if you're able to get out into the
schools and if you were with some of
those experiences were like
anyone
well thank you I was able to get around
to all the schools in my country
Bannister District I got to meet with
all the principals and some of the
teachers
and it was by me being new on the board
it was a very educational experience for
me
but I would highly highly disturbed
about our mobile units but I hopefully
the one percent can start working
towards improving that condition thank
you yes sir
anybody else
and thank you Mr Fitzgerald for sharing
that's one of the things that we had
mentioned in our letter there are issues
that we know for a fact exist and we
didn't have the finances to be able to
fix them but hopefully now that that
money's coming in we can move forward
and find a style for our children and
for our future in this community now
speaking of the future we're turning
over a leaf to 2023 and I recall last
year when I stood here I did a prayer
because my grandmother taught what you
do at the end you also do at the
beginning
and my prayer for us as we go into a new
year is that whatever we have carried as
far as a burden that we release it
that we are role models to our young
people and all that we do regardless of
what position we might hold because
we're all truly Educators anything that
you do that somebody can emulate they
have learned from you
so whatever they learned from you that
it be vested in their spirit and they're
able to demonstrate it full and through
to the best of their potential be it
from our younger people to our more
seasoned veterans and that we're able to
leave this place better than what we
found it because that's our purpose on
this Earth
so I wish each of you a blessed holiday
season with your family and your friends
much rest and peace and hope and
prosperity for the new year to begin
thank you
[Applause]
up next is our staff and committee
reports the first one is degrading and
Reporting committee we have with us I
think Dr ball and Miss Petty correct Dr
Bob
welcome we thank you for coming yeah
happy to be here
uh good evening chairman Das school
board members Dr Jones it is a privilege
to be here in Pennsylvania county
schools I had a beautiful drive on my
way over here and I appreciate all the
hospitality as I've been welcomed here
before I begin my report this evening
one of the first things I want to just
share is I I truly believe the school
board the grading committee and the
leadership team here in Pennsylvania
county schools should really be
committed for its very thoughtful and
purposeful
consideration of research and best
practices as it relates to grading and
Grading reform in the division I'm a
former Elementary School teacher
principal and I also more recently was a
governor School director and I can tell
you that the the questions that you guys
are asking the problems or opportunities
of practice are are the same questions
that I know I encountered during my time
as a practitioner so they're not germane
to Pennsylvania County Schools but they
are they're true challenges that we're
facing and so again I commend you and
your team for really taking a very
asserted look at what the research says
to guide your decision making
so just to begin this report was most
recently shared last week with the grade
and Grading and Reporting committee and
so I will share with you a very similar
presentation we'll synthesize in some
areas
but just to give you an overview of
where we're going we're going to look
first at the research as it relates to
grades grading and assessment we're
going to then take a deeper dive into
what the research tells us on specific
grading scales as well as
marking periods or marking frequencies
we will then do an examination of the
current practices in Pennsylvania county
schools and we will leave you with some
recommendations for implementation I got
an opportunity to do the front load of
the work but the true work lies with
your team and how you move forward
and so with respect to assessment
assessment has actually been examined in
the literature for over a hundred years
and some of the early research with
respect to assessment and Grading looks
specifically at reliability of teacher
assigned grades so is there consistency
from teacher to teacher and how we're
assigning grades
later on in the research also it was
examined whether grades should be Norm
or Criterion reference so how are we
grading students how are we comparing
them to other students
and also what are their differences in
grading practices that are being
employed
more recently the literature with
respect to grading practices has again
continued to focus on reliability of
grading
also looking at how grades relate to
Future educational outcomes so what's
the impact on students beyond their K-12
experience and finally What do teachers
consider so what are their perceptions
with respect to grading practices
another area that we explored in depth
was with respect to how assessment
relates to student motivation
so this first quote here students are
motivated when they believe that their
effort will result in meaningful success
so there's a big emphasis within the
literature on making sure that we are
addressing feedback feedback truly has
the power to motivate students it lets
them know where they are and where
they're going and you also help them
craft a plan of how they will get there
while higher standards may increase
motivation for some students standards
that seem unattainable may cause other
students to give up so recognize that
there is a balancing act with which the
standards we set for our students
and finally student motivation is
impacted when assessments are relevant
challenging and they receive meaningful
feedback
we also shared with the reporting
committee information about formatives
and summative assessment and I'm sure
for the Educators Among Us these are
these are not new terms to you all but
when we're talking about formative
assessment we're talking about
assessment for learning so that's
assessment that's going to guide
instruction it's going to let teachers
know where they go next summative
assessment is really looking at what is
the overall in result of learning and so
the National Council for measurement and
education really recommends a balance of
both types of assessment to guide the
instructional process
there's also caution with summative
assessments it's recommended that
summative assessments are not used as
the sole indicator of students learning
so to translate that to more
user-friendly terms it's not recommended
that a summative assessment would
essentially assign a student's grade for
them
and so what are some of the Practical
implications of this theoretical
information so the National Association
for College admission counseling
reported that students academic
achievements which include their grades
the strength of curriculum and admission
test scores those are the things that
constitute the most important factors in
the admissions decision and so that
information right there that affirms
what we already know that the practice
of grading students is high States and
important to our students
I'm sorry I skipped one one piece here
also 75 percent of colleges rated grades
in all High School courses as
considerably important and 73 rated
grades and College Prep courses as
considerably important
we also looked at the area specifically
as it relates to high school GPA
it's important to know that while the
research does indicate that College
admissions do heavily weigh in the
impact of grade point average grade
point average is rarely taken at face
value so essentially what that means is
college admissions officers recognize
that there are great variations and
differences in how schools employ their
GPA how GPA is calculated specifically
as it relates to various grading skills
so when a college admissions officer is
receiving GPA they recognize that you're
not always comparing apples to oranges
it is seen as it is seen as subjective
furthermore it's also recognized in the
research that grading can be subjective
within the same school within the same
division and also across teachers
and so one thing that we do know about
high school gpas is they often are a
good predictor of a student's Readiness
for college and often can be a better
predictor of a student's Readiness for
college than perhaps a score on a
standardized test a standardized test
score is going to give you a snapshot of
performance and many times it will
measure aptitude but GPA will factor in
a student's entire K12 not K-12 career
but their secondary career and really
help to gauge what their future
performance could look like at the
post-secondary level
with respect to class Rank and strength
of curriculum class Rank and GPA were
two of the top top four considerations
among most competitive colleges in the
United States
also test scores in schools with higher
standards excuse me test scores Rose in
schools with higher grading standards
but the increase was greater for
students in the top of the grading
distribution than for those in the
bottom so I think that statistic is
important to note that the decisions
that you make about grading students
don't impact all students equitably
there are differences in how they
motivate and affect our students
there are there is no evidence that
higher standards raise either High
School graduation or college attendance
for my minorities in fact there is
evidence that higher standards actually
reduce graduation rates
another area
um where high school GPA may impact
future opportunities for students is
with respect to eligibility for
Collegiate Athletics so this is just a
quick synopsis of how GPA is calculated
for students who are pursuing Athletics
at the Collegiate level but again it
doesn't take into consideration grading
scales students are assigned a grade
base or a point value based on their
grade and on their High School
transcript
this is something that probably
resonates with students and families of
course is the impact of GPA for
scholarship opportunities so University
Personnel ranked GPA act and SAT scores
and class rank as the top three most
important variables considering what
considered when awarding Merit
Scholarships
we also identified one specific program
that was that occurred in Florida that
students with a 3.0 GPA had 75 percent
of their tuition covered including a
stipend for living expenses and students
with a 3.5 GPA had a hundred percent of
their tuition covered with a stipend for
living expenses so I realize that's a
very isolated example in case but I
share that with you for you to
understand how high stakes and impactful
students eligibility for Merit
Scholarships can be
and now let's take a look at the
research on specific grading practices I
do for the sake of full disclosure I do
want to share that this is not an area
that is heavily covered in the research
the research is really the Empirical
research is really lacking in this area
so one of the things that we have hoped
to do is capture what are some of the
practices being employed across the
Commonwealth and within region 6 here
so the scale for grading an assignment
or assessment is less important than the
appropriateness and rigor of the
assignment or assessment itself
and so when we're talking about 10 point
grading scales and we're talking about
seven point grading scales it's
important to note that actually both of
them are really hundred Point grading
skills because even in a ten point scale
or a seven point scale a student can
earn a grade that ranges from zero to
one hundred and so when we're thinking
about a 100 point scale
there are inherent flaws within a
hundred point scale essentially because
grades below 60 are all considered
failing grades so you're already excuse
me you're a talk with my hands you're
already basing your grading on a scale
in which a majority of students or not
students a majority of grades fall
within the failing range
and also there is no meaningful
difference between scores that may be
differentiated between one or two points
so for instance if a teacher assigns a
grade of a 92 and they assign a grade of
a 93. on a student's report card that's
assuming that there are a hundred
different distinctions in student
performance and so we know that because
of an error and lots of different
subjectivity within grading it can
really be difficult to ascertain what
are the differences between one or two
points in student performance
and I do apologize it's a little
challenging to read but I really wanted
to be able to share with you all uh what
what the landscape looks like for our
largest school divisions in Virginia so
this was based on Virginia Department of
Education data and the actual specific
practices grading practices was gleaned
from their division websites
and so what you have in the First Column
is the largest school divisions in
Virginia the second column denotes
whether or not they use a 10-point scale
what we found was eight of the ten
divisions depicted are currently
employing a 10-point grading scale
if they were not using a 10-point scale
the second column depicts what scale
they were using and so none of the ones
that we looked at were using a seven
point or similar scale some of them were
using
um one through four so similar to how
grades are weighted so a grade of an a
would be a four and and so forth
we also looked at which divisions were
using standard space grading
and we have denoted those as well six of
the ten that we examine we're using
standard space grading at at least one
of the levels some were using them
specifically at elementary and some were
using it across the division we also
just shared with you population size for
reference and finally the last column is
looking at grading interval so how often
do students receive report cards
and as you can see a majority of them
receive them quarterly and we were just
unable to glean that information with
respect to Chesapeake schools
so we we talked about some of the
largest school divisions but I also
think it's important to take into
consideration What's Happening Here in
your backyard so we're we also share
with you information with respect to
divisions in region six and so this is
the divisions the first column
is the ones that are using a 10-point
grading scale and the second column are
the divisions that are not and So
currently Pennsylvania schools is an
outlier with respect to use of a
10-point grading scale
also when we talked about grading scales
are not heavily covered in the research
another area that also is not heavily
studied is the impact of the length of
grading periods so nine week intervals
are the most common grading intervals in
the United States and Canada
and so there is an emphasis on making
sure that students with this duration of
grading practice that students and
families have an opportunity to be
regularly informed about student
progress and that can occur through the
one line teacher grade books that
teachers use
um there is research very limited
research at the post-secondary level
community at community colleges and
University levels that actually
recommend shorter grading grading
intervals and that leads to improved
student outcomes with respect to program
completion I share that with you because
that is actually some of the The Limited
Empirical research that we did fine
however I really encourage you to
interpret it cautiously because the
context of post-secondary experience is
very different than a traditional K-12
experience
and we also wanted you to have a
snapshot of what grading period
frequencies look like in region 6 by
School Division and again the First
Column are divisions that are employing
a nine-week grading period interval and
the second column are those that are
using a six-week grading period And so
in with respect to this information
depicted Henry and Pennsylvania are the
ones that are using a six-week grading
period but if you'll note Henry is
actually using both nine week and six
week but it depends on the the level so
I believe their sixth week is being used
at the secondary level with high school
students and non-week at the elementary
and middle school level
we also wanted to make sure we shared
with the grading committee other areas
other recommendations for practice as it
impacts grading scales as you as you
move forward
with any potential reform with respect
to those topics one of the areas that we
encourage the grading committee to
consider is the impact of zeros and
minimum grading so assigning a zero as
you may be well aware is not necessarily
accurately depicting a student's
knowledge or learning on a subject and
it can unfairly skew students grades
when used as part of an average so later
in our presentation we'll talk a little
bit more about what some of those
alternatives to zeros could look like
for the grading committee's
consideration
we also talked about the weighting of
various grades and assignments first
it's important to remember that grades
represent academic academic learning in
a subject and should be determined
primarily by student academic
performance or major assignments and
assessments so we know that final exams
can weigh a big factor or can be a big
factor in students overall grade
calculation and so what we wanted to do
is where the research
addressed the the weighting of exams is
share that also with the grading
committee so there are 25 states that
actually use some type of end of course
assessment to factor into the overall
grading and eight of the students excuse
me eight of the states counted the exam
as part of the final course grade and
the exam Grade weed somewhere in the
ballpark of 10 to 30 percent of the
student's overall grade calculation a
majority of the
states that did report what percentage
it fell within the about 20 percent
range 30 percent
was obviously on the on the higher end
and they were much more limited um
data points for States using the higher
end
also an area in the literature that is
receiving increasing
coverage so to speak is in the area of
standards-based grading so
standards-based grading in a nutshell is
looking at student performance as it
relates to specific standards so if you
think at a very Elementary level so to
speak in kindergarten for instance a
student might be graded based on their
ability to count and I'm oversimplifying
but a student could receive a grade that
would be predetermined such as
progressing or Mastery or not yet
mastered
obviously those levels would be
predetermined but with respect to
standards-based grading you're not
necessarily averaging in and factoring
in lots of different skills or concepts
students are being graded with respect
to individual skills or concepts
and I did want to share this quote with
you from Marzano standard space grading
has the power to transform education and
raise K-12 education to a level of
Effectiveness and efficiency never
before seen in its history so if you're
familiar with Marzano he looks a lot at
research-based practices and its impact
on student outcomes
so now here's where the work lies so as
you all and your committee and your
leadership team are thinking about
potential reform here are some
recommendations from
Tom goski who's a leader in assessment
practices in the field so here's some
recommendations for practice first keep
the process simple a complete task in
order
address why before what so why are we
going about this work what is the
outcome that we hope to see
four also understand the importance of
tradition so when we think about what
currently is happening in our schools
why why are those practices enduring
what's the value what can we learn from
those practices and finally I know
you'll love this last one as board
members anticipate opposition so we know
that all change if and when change
occurs there are always going to be
people on all ends of the spectrum with
their willingness or resistance to
change and so be prepared to embrace
those who are excited about change and
those who are resistant to it as well
and also I think this quote is so
important grading is one of the most
challenging parts of a rigorous
classroom many of the aspects of grading
such as whether to grade homework are
individual choices for a teacher when
making grading decisions always start by
considering your purpose
also rigor is a concept that often comes
up when we think about grading reform
and Grading practices
earlier definitions or
conceptualizations of of rigor were
really meant to define a very rigid
system so students would only earn
higher grades or marks so to speak on
possibly a predetermined level so that's
really an early conceptualization of
rigor and I wanted to make sure I
clarified that rigor as it currently is
defined in the literature is not defined
exclusively by grading practices
when we're talking about rigor in a
classroom rigor can exist regardless of
the grading scale rigor involves
instruction that's multifaceted
considers methods pedagogy and use of
assessment to guide instruction based on
standards and also increasing the rigor
of instruction necessitates engaging and
challenging students so what you're
really trying to do in a rigorous
classroom is support those 21st century
skills critical thinking problem solving
and true rigor is the result of weaving
all those facets and components together
to raise students to higher levels of
learning
and so I'm sure you're well familiar
with the current practices in
Pennsylvania schools so I don't want to
belabor those but as you're well aware
here's our current grading scale as well
as how each of the six weeks are
weighted as it factors into the semester
average with exams weighing as 20 exams
weighing 25 percent
there's also a report on student conduct
and you can also see how
Advanced and AP courses are weighted
here's also a side-by-side comparison
with respect to letter grades the First
Column is the current grading scale used
in Pennsylvania this is what it would
look like
under a 10 point grading scale and this
is also compared to a four point grading
scale so when we were looking at some of
those larger divisions that had a four
point scale this is what's meant here
and also a five point weighted scale
and so what we have hoped to do is to
take all of this information because
it's a lot and to make recommendations
to the grading committee and to you all
about where do we go next and so you
have an opportunity to really make the
hard decisions and grapple with the
research and identify what's currently
in the best interest of Pennsylvania
County Schools so in doing so we are
presenting three options with respect to
grading skills
um
and of course you know this you're not
limited to these options but these were
ones that we felt like
best captured recommendations of
practice
so option one is to change to a 10 point
scale at the secondary level and
continue with examination of best
practices at the elementary level for
instance to further explore topics such
as standard space grading at the
elementary level
and of course their inherent benefits
and limitations
quickly the benefits would be alignment
to school divisions in region six
consistency and practice with some of
your Regional programs and some dual
enrollment courses a potentially higher
GPA for college-bound students
potentially higher GPA for merit-based
scholarships
potentially higher GPA for student
athletes improved motivation for
struggling students
and also provides Elementary level
additional time to research and or Pilot
best practice
limitations of this option it may be
perceived as decreased rigor
it would require and necessitate updates
to division practices and Department
expectations anywhere grades are a
factor
it does require two distinct grading
scales at the elementary and secondary
levels
it requires continued research and
exploration by the grading committee
stakeholder education is required for
standard space grading
and also this option does have inherent
flaws in a hundred Point grading scale
and finally the issues of zeros are not
addressed within the scope of a ten
point scale
and so like I said we're going to
present to you three options just so you
have full disclosure before we dive into
all of them option one is our
recommendation from the strong and
Associates research team based on
evidence from the literature as well as
the synthesis of practices occurring
here in Pennsylvania
option two would be to change to a ten
point scale at all levels and so many of
the benefits that we identified in the
aforementioned slide are really the same
here and so I'm going to
kind of go through those a little bit
more quickly that there's alignment
consistency in practice potentially
higher GPA for college-bound students
merit-based scholarships and for student
athletes as well as improve motivation
for struggling students
some of the limitations
it may be perceived as decreased rigor
there are going to be updates required
for division practices Elementary levels
may have to adapt to further grading
system changes in the future so what's
meant by this bullet is that if
Elementary were to migrate to a 10-point
scale and secondary it's possible that
the grading committee is going to be
revisiting the issue of grading scales
not too far down the future or in the
future because the research is still
limited with respect to standards-based
grading but we're seeing the trend in
the landscape that's becoming more and
more prominent in practice
there are inherent flaws at a 100 Point
grading scale as I've mentioned once
again issues of zeros are not addressed
in a ten point scale sorry it may not go
too fast
and our third option that we are
presenting is essentially uh no change
so this option would involve retaining
the current grading scale that's used
and so benefits here are a continuity of
practice it is motivating to high
achieving students
the scale may be perceived as more
rigorous
and some of the limitations here
there are inherent flaws in the hundred
point scale the issues of zeros is not
addressed in a ten point scale
it would be misalignment of practice
with school divisions in region six
there's inconsistency in practice with
regional programs and some dual
enrollment courses I didn't really
address this but as a previous governor
School director I know this was
something we encountered frequently our
we had 14 divisions served in our
program and so our students grades on
their transcript and for us it was a
community college transcript oftentimes
was not the same letter grade that they
received on their High School transcript
and that was because they would then
have to convert their grades so it
became a little confusing to students
and families because of the conversion
that had to occur with a large program
such as hours it was almost unavoidable
but just to share with you what some of
the implications of practice are there
it can also result in a potentially
lower GPA for college-bound students as
well as eligibility for merit-based
scholarships and potentially lower GPA
for student athletes
as well as decreased motivation for
struggling students
so
those are the three options that we have
presented again you're not limited to
those options as you well know but we
hope that they will at least synthesize
some of the options and help you make a
decision for moving forward
also with respect to the summary of
marking period practices in Pennsylvania
county schools as you're aware the
current marking period practices that
are utilized are a six-week marking
period and I'm sure you're also well
aware that academic calendar for next
school year has already been approved
so once again we have hope to we have
attempted to present to you options here
there are two that we've listed the
first option would be to change to a
nine-week grading reporting interval and
some of the benefits associated with
doing so would involve a decreased
number of grades needed so when there's
an expectation of a report card grade
typically administrators or schools have
an expectation of how many grades must
be averaged in
to be considered a more valid or
reliable grade so that's what's meant by
that bullet
also another benefit would be reduced
time needed for report card preparation
and dissemination
it also would align to the practice with
other school divisions in region 6.
and also with large school divisions in
the Commonwealth
some of the limitations this would
involve fewer opportunities to formally
communicate student performance with
parents so report cards are seen as a
formal mechanism for communication of
student performance
our recommendation from strong
Associates is option one as presented
once again based on synthesis of
research and current practices in
Pennsylvania county schools
the second option would be to retain the
current reporting interval of using six
weeks
benefits here more grades will be needed
for report card averages therefore
students have more opportunities to
formally demonstrate their learning
once again continuity of practice and
consistency with the calendar and also
increased opportunities to formally
communicate a student performance with
families
limitations there would be increased
time needed for report card preparation
and dissemination
increased number of grades to ensure
validity and reliability of grades
and inconsistency of practice with
school divisions in region 6.
and so in addition to those options we
did also share additional grading
practice recommendations with the
committee
and we'll go over those very quickly
indicators of effective grading we've
provided these here for you first and
foremost great according to your policy
so once that's dictated at this level
making sure that's communicated with
Fidelity to teachers I'm using rubrics
I'm making sure there's alignment to
assessments with respect to grading do
not include things that are extraneous
to student performance such as
attendance effort or behavior
where possible and feasible involves
students in the grading process
do not give zeros and grade for quality
not completion
when we talked about zeros and again I
I'm going to say first and foremost this
is a conversation that came up in almost
every single one of my leadership
meetings as a principal so it's easy for
me to stand up here and present it
because I get to go home
um but at the end of the day I realize
that this is a really a challenge for
practitioners it's a challenge for
teachers and principals so my biggest
recommendation to you moving forward is
to really be very thoughtful and
purposeful with the research really
think about what the impact zeros have
and once again go back to the purpose of
why why are we grading students what's
our purpose and let that guide the
decision making
so there are lots of Alternatives the
grading committee can consider such as
minimum grading practices
removal of outlier grades the third
bullet to exhaust appropriate tiered
interventions so essentially not giving
students an option to get a zero they
would stay for after school tutoring
they really would just have multiple
attempts and opportunities to submit
missing work or incomplete work and the
fourth option would be using incompletes
as appropriate when missing work
significantly distorts grading
also for your consideration if there is
a change in grading scales there are
academic distinctions that the board or
the leadership team may want to revisit
just to to determine if the criteria for
those distinctions is still a good fit
also again there isn't a magic number
identified in the research with respect
to weighting of exams again this can be
a very tricky
a challenge for practitioners so what we
have attempted to do is just share with
you some possible models for
consideration that that also factor in
what some of the states are doing
who use end of course exams and relies
on about a 20 weighting so with a
six-week model it had it calculating as
19 percent
and a non-week model factoring at US 20
and again showing you don't always have
to be 25 you don't have to have these uh
perfectly rounded numbers that we so
traditionally use in K-12 education
and this is a really important point
that I hope also teachers will take into
consideration if you continue to use a
hundred point scale whether it be a
seven point or ten point number of
grades really is important consideration
your division protocol currently does
have expectations that teachers are
expected to grade at least one
assignment per week so it's important
that there are appropriate number of
grades per marking period but it's also
important that teachers are thoughtful
about how they set up their grade books
so I know this is getting into the weeds
but if you have lots of categories
making sure there's enough grades in
each of the category to have a truly
valid and reliable grade
and really at the end of the day making
sure there's Clarity and transparency of
expectations to students and Families
also the missing work policy for
Pennsylvania schools is stated here and
so it's our recommendation that
Pennsylvania schools consider the impact
of factoring attendance in a student's
grades as well as the impact of zeros on
students grade calculations
and we also have shared with you
specific policies that we identified in
which GPA or grading practices were
referenced so that if there is a
decision about making any types of
changes there's a quick reference of
where that would also have a ripple
effect with respect to your board policy
and finally have final recommendations
As you move forward with your decisions
we do recommend you consider the
benefits and limitations of grading
skill options and marking period
intervals and additionally a continued
examination of best practices with
respect to some of the topics we covered
tonight I'm also the grading committee
should ensure there is appropriate
communication with all relevant
stakeholders and appropriate
professional development and support for
teachers so we recognize that if there
is a decision to move forward in the
foreseeable future that's only the
beginning of the work the next step is
communication with stakeholders and
making sure teachers feel supported and
prepared
and
um also just letting you know we have a
fortunate opportunity to train with
Pennsylvania County schools with strong
Associates later this spring but we're
always happy to partner with school
divisions where our research can align
so I am very grateful for this
opportunity to work with you all I'm
happy to do my best to answer questions
that you may have and thank you for
bearing with me during a very long
report
questions that I can answer
anybody have any questions talk about
anyone
thank you so much I know that was a lot
of work it's been a lot of effort put
into this I know Miss Patty's probably
lost a minute or two of sleep
she's but I just want to say she's been
a great resource and a pleasure to work
with us you know this grading has been a
topic that's kind of gone back and forth
for a while
it's really the first time that we have
looked at it this thoroughly
um I think a couple of things that stood
out to me that really made me think was
one of them was we were the only School
Division in region six we were by
herself so that that was kind of
surprising
um and not I don't know if you had it in
your research exactly but I saw some
other research that some colleges or
scholarship committees don't ask whether
you're on a seven or ten point scale
they just say what is your GPA and
strictly go off of that so having said
that some of our students would be at a
disadvantage in competing for
scholarships because their GPA would be
a little bit smaller because of the the
seven point versus the 10 points so they
would be at a disadvantage to get those
scholarships so those are the couple
things that really got my attention in
this and I spoke to miss Petty about it
you know earlier
had not really considered that so does
anybody have any questions
I think we're gonna have to make it I
think you're gonna have a recommendation
Miss Petty in just a few minutes aren't
we I'm going to pass the Baton yeah Miss
Petty and the grading committee have
taken all of this and she's going to
give you one option here in just a
minute Mr Moon and and I think they have
done a lot of work I'll be honest and a
lot of discussion
and I think you finally got the group a
consensus didn't it
it took a lot of time to get to this
place but um
we did put a lot of time and effort into
this actually it goes back to 2015 2016
when I first came into this position and
Dr Jones shared with me that they had
similar conversations when they were and
when he was in this this role so um we
looked at surveys that we conducted
2016-2018 2020 2020 survey probably came
the closest
um we actually had enough votes to to
put it before you but we still had some
considerations to look at especially
there were some concerns at the high
school level but now that we have the
parent portal which can be accessed at
any time so grades can be looked at
regularly and we've now instituted at
the high school level a one-to-one
initiative and I think I think Dr ball
for pulling all of our information
together because we gave her minutes
she looked at Agenda she looked at all
the results from our service they she
looked at considerations and discussions
that we had had over the years and
pulled this all together with the
current research we had the committee
which consisted of Administrators
teachers and parents at each level in
the audience we have Miss Sherry beard
who's with us you raise her hand and
staff members present who were with us
at Department we we brought in a lot of
input because we felt that it was
important to look at this and as Mr Doss
chairman Dawes pointed out we noted that
we were the only School Division the the
outlier and um
we've really looked at the benefits of
moving in this direction and that any of
the limitations would be where the work
continues so I want you to know that
I'll work tonight even though we have
two recommendations the work does not
end because we're going to use the
limitations to help us to address the
areas that we want to put in place as
far as guidelines for grading and
Reporting and so with these two
recommendations we would then come back
and look at where the policies would
need to be updated so it's quite
possible based on the decisions you all
make this evening will then come back in
January with some recommendations to the
policies and Then followed up in
February possibly with additional so and
I think you recalled in the
recommendation for the 10 point scale
strong and Associates did recommend the
option one which would have just
included the secondary level but after a
lengthy discussion the committee felt
that we could address the limitations
for the elementary many of our
elementary administrators and parents
spoke up and stated that they wanted to
move in the same direction for
consistency so any limitations we would
address second semester so like I said
the work doesn't end this evening we
will be meeting regularly so that by the
end of the year we will have guidelines
that will be in place as we begin the
2023-2024 school year so the two
recommendations that we have are first
the committee recommends
approval of a 10-point grading scale in
grades K-12
and then the grading and Reporting
committee would continue the regular
meetings for the remainder of the year
to address the additional grading
practices that were outlined from strong
and Associates and then the second
recommendation would be that the
committee recommends approval of a
nine-week grading grade reporting
interval and grades pre-k through 12 for
the upcoming school year and that the
grading and Reporting committee will
continue to address the grading
practices and then if the recommendation
is to adopt the nine week grade
reporting interval the calendar
committee would reconvene to amend the
2023-2024 calendar which would just be a
small amendment that would replace the
six week intervals with the nine week
intervals
so um like I said the work doesn't stop
this evening we will continue so
regardless of the decision that's made
we will continue to look at these
additional recommendations as far as how
we look at zero standard space grading
and so forth so these are the two
recommendations that we like voted on
separately
okay so the first recommendation is to
go to a 10-point scale
I have a motion
I'll make the motion
any other discussion
oh
you said this you've done surveys if we
make this at the parents had an
opportunity to know General I mean how
did you do that and one of those surveys
yes we did get parent input and their
main concern was as you heard one of the
limitations was the number of reporting
periods but now that we have the parent
portal we had a high school teacher that
spoke because that was the the
hesitation from many high school
individuals and from parents was that
reporting and so one of our teachers
shared High School teachers indicated
that now with the parent portal and the
one-to-one computers at the high school
level and also in the classrooms even at
elementary and middle school we have
computers in the classroom so children
students can look at their grades
parents have access to the parent portal
so so grades can be looked at at any
time
I just know a lot of folks that just
don't even not aware how to use that yes
and so that's where I would work would
come in and educating and helping our
parents to be able to know that they're
easily accessible
I'd love to see you hear what our
students say about this that they've
been involved
but my concern is what we talked about
is being perceived and I know I'm just
real old school about this
but we're going to make kids be students
a students with no more effort
well the rigger came up I'm glad you
brought that up we looked at the rigor
and so that was always one of the items
that we look closely at because we
performed very well we also looked at
other school divisions that are
performing higher than we are and they
have performed well with the 10 point
grading scale and the nine week report
card so that does not lessen the rigor
the rigor lies with our excellent
teachers that we have who work
diligently to make sure that our
students are prepared but that's that's
getting back to the same thing I'm
concerned about
it doesn't mean a lot to me where we
compare it to other divisions around us
and just on these I'm more and more I
would want more I'd want to know
how are they doing the SOS how are their
graduation weeks how are they
disciplined because I'm I'm pretty proud
of what we've accomplished here with the
limited resources we have and I deal
with some other divisions around that
struggle spend a lot more money and
don't get the results we do so that
that's my biggest concern yes
we're going to may have better gpas but
they may mean less
and as I see other divisions going down
this road over the years I don't want us
to start that and thirdly and this
merits can attest and so can Dr Jones to
the to the fact that the committee
met several times they they spoke in
depth a lengthy conversation about the
pros and the cons and so and how we
would move forward to address the
concerns so we're taking the limitations
as part of our discussions on how we put
these limitations into benefits for the
guidelines that we will address maybe
Miss Merritts would like to speak to
some of the conversation that we had
that addresses your concerns
a great meeting a very heterogeneous
mixture in the group to represent at all
ends I can speak Miss beard was great
speaking from other states
and how they had adopted the 10 point
scale and for it to be more of an equal
playing field when our students are
applying to colleges for instance I had
the pleasure of teaching AP slash School
enrollment biology class several years
at Dan River and my students in the
classroom suffered because they were
only on the seven point scale where if
they took the same course at Governor's
School they were on a 10-point scale and
they're taken and getting the exact same
bio 101 bio 102 credit and they're not
benefiting in the class the rigor I
would say is almost more at the high
school level just because you're seeing
them every day and you can take them to
another level
I don't believe the rigor in the
classroom is going to change we have
phenomenal Educators in this County that
are teaching at levels now that are
making it difficult to get a 94 in the
classroom so when these students are
achieving the 92
that you're actually doing enough work
that should be awarded as an A and when
these students are applying to colleges
when they're applying for scholarship
scholarships
um we cannot say that we are guaranteed
know that those colleges are looking at
whether it's a seven point scale whether
it's a ten point scale and we need to
give our students the the best benefit
that we can
well and I know this is no way of
thinking but that kind of proves the
point I'm saying all of a sudden we're
going to be having people not doing any
more work
just getting to Belgrade
no that's definitely do 94 you get an A
if you're doing 92 then you're going to
get that a but you're not doing any more
work
now maybe I'm just misreading it well
this no um that's not the case because
we we have students who attend our
governor school programs some students
that are in dual enrollment they're on a
10 point scale and and their their
classes are very rigorous and then you
have some of the same classes and the
base and the bay school and some of our
teachers had concerns that if they're in
one of those programs they're on a 10
point scale but if they're in the base
school then they're on a seven point
scale so there was an inconsistency
there I understand English but maybe I
read it wrong and I tried to read it but
it was long it was a long information
this weekend
right but I what I read on the 10 point
scale is 92 or 100 is an a yes sir down
with 7.94 to 100 is a
okay
90 to 100 would be an A so then 80 to 89
would be a b right
yeah
I think I had that's kind of the same
concern that he had so maybe I
misunderstanding too
if a student takes a test on the seven
point grading scale
he has to get a 70 to pass
right but under the ten point grading
scale he'd only have to make a 60 to
pass
so it seems like
yeah he's not having to try as hard to
pass the test
because if it sounds like you're just
kind of lowering the standards on what
it is to pass something
the student was on a lower grading scale
um where they could reach the 60 it
actually improved their mental stability
and their ability to focus to help get
them that way because we're not always
comparing the same students you can see
the cartoon that's depicted numerous
times that you have
numerous animals right in front of you
and you tell every one of them including
a fish in a bowl to climb a tree they're
not all going to get to that same point
so you can't always treat every student
the same and this great inability on a
10-point scale can reach all students
and can help motivate all students
um you also have to consider one thing
that I could speak on when
we assess the biology as a will in the
classroom if you look at the state
standard for biology I said well we tell
the students they have to get 26 out of
50 questions correct if you equate that
that's a 52. I mean we're not reducing
our standards and you look at what our
state is telling that a pass rate is so
and these teachers in the buildings are
doing way more than that educate they're
not teaching to attest they're educating
way more than what they have to do
and there was a lot of discussion in our
group about the improved motivation for
struggling students
I would think that that if the board
decides to go to a 10-point scale I
would think our instructional team would
would reach out to our teachers and kind
of give them you know tell them about
about the scale but then it's teacher
specific I think that they would
increase the rigor of a test based on a
10 point scale versus a seven point
scale and and make it more difficult as
far as the types of questions to earn
that a because you really have a
40-point pass right there so I think
it's a teacher Pacific I think the rigor
is going to be in the assessment itself
and the instruction that the teacher
gives and then they'll just
adjust their assessment to measure the
kids
knowledge of that topic but I think it's
going to be teacher specific and I think
we can provide some training this Petty
can provide some training for teachers
if that's what we need but I think this
is Maris mentioned that that our
teachers already teaching today rigor I
think that they'll just adjust some to
be sure that the kids are earned the
grades that that they would
show the teacher what actually they know
about the topic and from the teacher
surveys the consistency in practice with
the regional programs and some dual
enrollment courses was the main reason
that the 10 point scale was brought to
us for consideration several years ago
and uh Miss beard and her research that
she compiled our parent representative
who's here tonight that was in some of
the information that she brought forward
as her main concern for wanting to
wanting us to look at it because her
concern was that she wanted our students
to be on the same playing field as our
neighbors and neighboring School
divisions who are going to be applying
for some to some of the same colleges
and universities
right now honestly yes ma'am would you
like our opinion on this matter sure
okay
um I say yes to ten point grading scale
because
it's really hard to compete with the
northern Virginia schools
um and having the seven point grading
skill makes that even harder and so it's
just
and also I'm in so many dual enrollment
in AP classes and it's so so sad to see
people get 90s and have an A but I have
to keep that 94.
and the rigor isn't going to go down
because if the kids are being rewarded
for
getting that 92 they're going to say oh
well then maybe I can get the 93 or
maybe I can get the 94.
um I don't think their work is going to
go down and if it does
that's their problem not not the
teachers not anybody else's so I think I
think there is no problems with the
rigor or
anything like that going down I just
think it'll help a lot of students
including myself
anybody else
I would like to say something actually
um
I know that the motivation they were
talking about in keeping this scale is
not a good motivation it's more of a
fear of failure
and when you have the Governor's School
kids getting 90s in the exact same class
that you're getting a 90 but they get an
eight and we get a B it's really
stresses us out and it's like
giving like I've had a panic attack
before because I don't have the 94 and
my GPA is going to drop
and they get to have the 90 and have the
A and they're okay so I feel like mental
health would be like like much better
with the 10 point scale and like your AP
classes they're teaching to get you to
the AP exam which is really hard so they
can't drop their standards and their
rigor because you have to pass that AP
exam
so that's just right
okay I do know most colleges use a 10
point scale so you'd be in line with
when you go on to higher education too
so
I think there's a lot of reasons that
it's better I don't think the rigor's
going to go down I think that's up to
the teacher I think they're going to
present the I think so I'm glad the
students spoke up because they're in
these classes so they know they can tell
you from experience that rigor is
certainly there in their dual enrollment
classes and so the teachers were
advocating for the students for the same
reason that our student Representatives
have brought to your attention
just the fact that some pie is going to
automatically get a bump in grape and
not doing that but not put any more
effort it's on the kids not on what our
staff do
but I never question the rigor went out
of this
anybody else
we need a roll call on this please Mr
Burton no no Mr Fitzgerald yes Mr
Henderson yes
Miss Merricks yes Mr Mills uh Mr Moon
Mr Dallas yes
I think I was five to two that's correct
all right and the next one is on the
nine week versus the sixth week is that
right Miss Patty yes sir so do I have a
motion to make that motion also sucking
it
any discussion on that anybody any
questions
all right we'll roll call
it's Burton no Mr Fitzgerald yes Mr
Henderson yes Miss Merricks yes Mr Mills
yes Mr Moon Mr Doss yes
thank you Mr Patty thank you I know
y'all put a lot of effort and work into
this and it's never easy to change I
mean a lot of people just don't want to
change because they don't like it but I
think it's time and I think it's the
right thing well we have a lot more work
to do so we'll be coming back we'll do
that thank you so much does anybody have
any questions on the remaining desk
report Mr Doss about the nine week
grading scale this is not withholding
any more information from the parents
because in that meeting it was discussed
where principals have the ability to
send out paper copies at an interim
point at the four and a half point or at
any point if they want to send them out
weekly they could I think they send out
mid three weeks they do so they'll just
be a four and a half they could actually
they could send them out even sooner if
they wanted to
and and I'm going to be honest if a kid
is failing or not doing good they should
not be waiting till the report card
before the teachers reaching out to the
parent or someone about that child's
performance
right that they shouldn't be waiting to
then
anybody have any questions on any of the
remaining death reports what's the
traveler yes sir before you move on and
this is to take effect next School
season
right okay yes 23 24.
okay before we get to the
superintendent's report I would like to
call out a couple of folks in attendance
I didn't do early I didn't exactly pick
up on them I think we have two of the
board of supervisor members here correct
Mr Donald scarce thank you all for
coming we also have a sheriff here Mr
Taylor good to see you and our
Commonwealth fraternities to ask you
thank you all for being here
must
Joan Dr Jones you want to give us your
report yes sir real quickly this evening
a couple things I have the sales tax
referendum planning is underway we've
had initial meetings with staff
we're preparing a report for you all at
your work session that you will vote on
this evening in January
any questions regarding of sales tax
referendum this evening and where we are
with that
okay the next item I have Middle School
athletics planning we have met with
our staff
um where the direction from the board is
to look at boys basketball and girls
volleyball for next year
we've met with staff we've met with
finance department we've met with Parks
and Rec
and our our intent is to have a report
to you all at the January board meeting
our January work session regarding that
and then this evening and she stepped
out I was planned to recognize Dr Robin
haymore this evening Dr haymore has just
completed her doctoral work at Radford
University on Friday she graduated and I
wanted to recognize her but she stepped
out this time but maybe when she comes
back in we can do that and then that's
all I have other than upcoming the SBA
meetings and conferences there up in
your packet in the dates and times there
any questions for me this evening
okay that's all yes sir unfinished
business with second rating of school
board policy ffpc k r Dash PC
any discussion
roll call please Mr Burton yes Mr
Fitzgerald yes Mr Henderson yes Mr Mills
yes Mr Moon Mr Dallas uh I've been
saying well you stepped out or should we
say Dr haymore you stepped out and
missed your recognition
so now that you're back Dr Jones
I'd like to recognize Dr Robin haymore
she graduated
[Music]
he looked up and you were gone
congratulations I know you put a lot of
hard work into it
all right under new business
um provision of school board policy is
that i i a
a a
and i i a b thank you have a motion
she won't you want to adopt this on the
first reading and wave in the second to
have a motion to adopt it don't first
read I'll make that motion okay
one second
any discussion
roll call please Mr Burton aye Mr
Fitzgerald aye Mr Henderson aye Ms
Merricks aye Mr Mills aye Mr Moon Mr
Dallas
okay so revision of school board policy
DJ Dash PC that's a purchasing policy I
want to wave with a second reading and
approve it on the first I have a motion
so move
second
any discussion
roll call please
Mr Burton aye Mr Fitzgerald aye Mr
Henderson aye Ms Merricks aye Mr Mays
aye Mr Moon aye Mr Dallas
addition of a secondary course for data
science
no emotion
second
any discussion
roll call please Mr Burton aye Mr
Fitzgerald aye Mr Henderson aye Ms
Merricks Mr Mills aye Mr Moon Mr Doss
next we have a secondary CTE course
addition and change Advanced
Manufacturing Academy STEM Academy don't
have a motion
so move stack it
any discussion
roll call Mr Burton aye Mr Fitzgerald
aye Ms Henderson aye Ms Merricks Mr
Mills aye Mr Moon Mr dolls aye Dominion
charging station participation agreement
that's for the new buses Mrs Scott given
right
okay that's for the new new electric
buses we'll be getting to modify the
original agreement to add these
have a motion
roll call please Mr Burton aye Mr
Fitzgerald aye Mr Henderson aye Ms
Merricks Mr Mills aye Mr Moon Mr Dallas
aye and the Declaration of surplus
property I think we had some old
vehicles that need to dispose of you can
do that through the bid process online
right
so accept the bus that you gotta you got
to destroy right
make the motion
a second
all right any discussion roll call
please Mr Burton aye Mr Fitzgerald uh Mr
Henderson aye Ms Merricks aye Mr Mills
aye Mr Moon Mr Dallas
next item we've discussed the gun free
zone resolution that we passed last
month
um Dr Jones I think we have someone here
that can kind of shed some light on it
for us Mr
happy Mr um Commonwealth Attorney was to
ask because if you'll come there's
there's been some confusion including
myself
who didn't quite understand until it
came to light that schools are covered
under one statute
that's correct and then this building
and other buildings that the school
system owned are not covered unless we
we may have a resolution to make them a
school uh gun freezer that's correct so
so could you apply to try to ease
people's minds and tell them how this
works so you enlighten me a lot when I
talk to you so if you could kind of do
that for these folks I'd appreciate sure
it came to my attention when Sheriff
Taylor asked me how to
go by instructing his officers to deal
with this situation
but there is a code section that allows
this body to declare property that it
owns as a quote-unquote gun-free school
zone any
expanding on what the federal definition
is so the federal definition is found in
title 18.18 USC section 921
and the federal law defines a school
zone is in or on the grounds of a public
parochial or private school
or within a thousand feet of that
building if you bring a firearm there
you can already be prosecute under
federal law if the United States
Attorney was so advised to prosecute you
and they Define the term school as a
school was provided to Elementary
secondary education as a terminal state
law so it would it would Encompass for
example Chatham Elementary Tunstall High
School Chatham middle all the schools
that are functioning as what we already
know of as schools
now in addition to that the federal the
state code
for possession of a firearm on school
property that's how it's that's how it's
titled but when the legislature writes
laws they say what they mean and the
words mean what they say and and I'm
Bound by the limitations and what the
code says and the code of Virginia says
you cannot bring a firearm on these
areas and there are four areas
first is the property of any child day
care center
that's public private religious operated
or preschool elementary middle or High
School
or any property
that's being used at that time it's not
a school solely for the purpose of
school functions
so for example if Tunstall High School
rents the AG Center the AG Center is
always out of school but if they rent it
for a night for a prom then during the
time that that problem is operating it
is being exclusively used for a school
function and therefore it will be
covered and you could be prosecuted for
having a firearm on school property
there and clearly you can prosecute I
can prosecute people for having a
firearm at Tunstall high school for
example if they come into that school
building or you know Grant Elementary
whatever school it is and then the final
is a school bus
you go on a school bus with a gun you
can be prosecuted it's a significant
limitation in the law because it's a
Classics felony up to five years in
prison
and you would lose obviously your right
to vote your fundamental right to keep
and bear arms as a result of that
conviction so I can only prosecute
people for bringing a firearm on school
property if it's one of these school
zones
now the federal definition is important
for this reason because the federal
definition almost tracks this except we
add schools school buses to it
and day care centers
because the code section that that you
cite in your ordinance is incorrect
first of all you cited
15.2-915 that's a new law that the
legislature General Assembly passed
maybe two years ago or maybe the 2021
special session that said that the
locality can declare gun prohibited
zones but the locality is only
represented by the Board of Supervisors
in this case not not the school board it
has to be the overarching body even
though you cited that incorrect code
section you cite the proper language
from the code section that does apply
and that is the and so to assist me if
you wish to have anybody prosecute I
would first ask that you amend your uh
your resolution to cite the proper code
section which is
22.1-131.1 and that was a
law that was passed in the 2021 special
session of the general assembly uh right
before the last election cycle
and that law gives you the ability to
declare your own gun-free zones and
that's that's the language you cited
from this code section when you did your
your resolution
the difference there is that section
says you may that you are given the
authority to declare your own gun-free
zone outside of school zones as already
defined by federal law
so the school zone definition becomes
important because as I understand I
wasn't here for your meeting when you
did this but this is one of the
buildings that was targeted with that
with that resolution was to prevent your
choice was to not have anyone bring
Firearms into this building in this ECC
building when you use this statue to
make that happen you are fundamentally
saying this is not a school
so I am prohibited in my opinion from
Prosecuting them for bringing a firearm
in here under that felony section where
I am allowed to prosecute someone is
because you've now made it a conditional
use since this building as I understand
is owned by the Pennsylvania County
School System
you have the authority when you declare
this gun-free zone to say you cannot
bring a gun in this building and that
makes it a conditional permit for entry
so I can prosecute you for trespassing
if you come into this building
everyone following me I can't believe
she's not a felony it's a no it's a
Class one misdemeanor it's still
significant crime because it is a crime
for which you can receive the 12 months
in jail and a 2500 are fine either or
both and because trespassing was was
deemed one of the barrier crimes that we
need to help stop certain sex offenders
all the legislature passed the law said
everybody's going to have a DNA sample
and you lose that privacy right because
it goes into the DNA Data Bank so that's
the that's a possibility now the issue
with trespassing is you've got to give
notice
to prosecute somebody for trespassing
you have to give them actual notice and
there's two ways to do that one is if
somebody came into this building
because because you passed your
resolution it's active right now if I
were not a law enforcement officer and I
were armed and I am a law enforcement
officer I'm not armed tonight if I came
in here with a gun
and y'all saw me with my gun because I
had it on my hip and was proud to carry
my gun for example you could say Brian
you got to go you couldn't prosecute me
right away for having a gun here because
I don't have any notice
even though you've done it in a public
hearing that's been broadcast I got to
show actual notice which means I got to
show that you that I got to prove Beyond
A Reasonable Doubt because that's the
element of every offense I have to prove
about Beyond real doubt that you knew
you were told you couldn't come in here
with a gun as I said there are two ways
to do that the first is
you see me with one you say Brian you
got to leave right now and take that gun
off you can come back in I can take the
gun off but you can't be in here with a
gun and I say well I ain't leaving
they're not going to be arrested because
I've been told to leave and told that
I'm not allowed to have a gun the other
way is by posting and you've seen
everybody seeing no trespassing signs no
no hunting signs those kind of things
those are posted signs that give the
person for knowledge you can post this
building Firearms are not are not
allowed
and if you want to do that my
recommendation would be to announce your
decision to make it a gun-free zone and
when I say this I'm the Commonwealth
story I don't take a position as a
Commonwealth's turning on whether you
should or should not do this that's for
you all to be elected you listen to the
people and they tell you what you should
do and you follow their will if you if
it is the pleasure of this body to keep
this enactment in place
my role much as it is when I go to
Richmond and talk to the general
assembly is like Harry Potter says
Mischief Managed make sure you get the
make sure everybody understands how to
do it right if that's what you want to
do what you what you're saying you want
to do is say no guns in this building
for example then you need to have the uh
a sign that would give people notice if
you want me to be the prosecutor that
says guns are not allowed in this
building if you enter this building with
a firearm you you're subject to being
prosecuted for trespassing
something to that effect if that's what
you really want to do
now practically because the sheriff was
asking me questions about how how would
my officers handle this we're not going
to be able to Pat people down that's
going to be a fourth minute violation
without without some Reasonable
Suspicion to suggest that they're armed
and in violation of this law so you
can't expect them to to search everybody
you can't say ma'am open up your purse
let me see what's in your purse or you
come in the building because that's
going to be a Fourth Amendment violation
uh you could put up a scanner
lawfully I believe but that's going to
cost money and you've got to have
somebody operate it and if you really
want to secure the building then you're
going to have to do it 24 7 because if
I'm really mad enough to come in here
with a gun knowing that I'm going to be
scanned for a meeting I'll come in here
beforehand and hide the gun
in a bathroom or something and then come
in here and get it so it I just want you
to understand the Practical difficulties
in dealing with this if we if we go
forward and you want to keep this
legislation that you passed and I and I
am asked to prosecute I'm going to need
to show the actual notice I'm going to
need to have somebody from the school
Division come and say yes the school
department division owns this building
and yes this is a this is a legislative
act that we passed an ordinance that we
passed a bylaw wherever you call it that
we passed and no we did not give Brian
Haskins who's being prosecuted any
special exemption to come in here I
didn't I didn't tell him on behalf of
the board that you can come in here
despite what the statute or the law says
everybody everybody understand that so
nobody can be prosecuted right now in my
opinion for coming onto this building
with a firearm for that felony offense
or bringing a fireball school property
even though this is school property
because the law is written the way it is
and everything that you have declared
beyond the schools you're saying is not
a school so it has to be prosecute as a
trespass
okay
does that help anybody
oh you are you not any clearer now
you're not as clear as we have this
building we have a central office
building we have the bus shop
we have the Whipple building we have the
maintenance shop or the maintenance
building
that right now are not really schools
and they wouldn't fall into school by
definition of the federal law
the legislature whether whether you
agree that they should have done this or
not
regardless on whether you what your
position is on the fundamental
individual right to keep and bear arms
that whether you the legislature is
giving you this Authority and it's
presumed constitutional until challenged
and overturned they gave you the
authority to declare any piece of
property that you own or lease
that's not already a school as to
declare it your own little gun free
school zone and that would include the
maintenance shop
um this building Bus Shop whatever you
want however you want to handle it uh I
just want you to know that that doesn't
mean that I can prosecute them for a
possession of a firearm on school
property I can't in fact you're by doing
so you've declared that I cannot
prosecute somebody that for that here
because it's not a school in your
definition when you say we're using this
law to expand into this building
but I can't prosecute them for for
trespassing if they're given notice
that can also include I.T buildings it's
just yes anything that you own release
now if you're worried about schools uh
let me let me tell you this the law
that's already written it makes it a
Classics felony to have a gun in those
areas applies not to just the school but
the school grounds and so at Tunstall
high school for example that would
include the parking lot
the ball fields the football field the
baseball field uh the concession stand
uh that's right 24 7 right uh that's
18.2 that's 308.1 no I mean that's 24
hours a day seven days yeah because
because regardless of who that statute
does not put a time limit on it in fact
in fact it says it it implies that there
is no time limit on it when it says
school and then comma and it goes on to
and any other building then used for
exclusive for school purposes another
thing you should consider is that when
you meet as a school board in something
that's not a school the school board
meeting tonight does not make this
building a school property building
for purposes of bringing a gun in here
for that statute
because there's a attorney general
opinion that says it does not because
this this is ironically this is a school
function obviously because you're
because you're doing it as a school
board meeting you have students here at
students here and had other students
here but but the Attorney General's
opinion which until a statute or case
law says otherwise controls us
uh says a school board meeting itself is
not a school function in that sense of
this statute for prosecution for the
felony of having a gun on school grounds
so that's the loophole that kind of came
to my attention when I started getting
the calls that people were wearing guns
into this building that it was a school
building how could they do it that's
what really started this whole
conversation yeah well no one apparently
has considered this to be a school
building for purposes of the federal or
or our state statute Now by passing this
resolution and aiming it at this
building you are saying that it falls
outside of those statutes and so the
only thing prohibiting you from bringing
a gun in here
is your resolution
and that when the legislature pass that
resolution they did not include a
punishment statute portion usually it
says it will say and a violation of the
statutes will be punished as this Class
one misdemeanor or classified felony or
whatever you want to call it
they didn't put that in that statute uh
sometimes they leave it out and they
have a punishment statute within the
article of all these statutes of the
Woodland falls under and you'll say
something the effect of a violation of
any uh statutory division on this
article
he was punished as they didn't do that
either they also did not amend the 18.2
308.1 to make it a felony
to give you the ability to create a
felony by declaring these other areas
gun-free school zones outside of the
federal definition
and so the only thing I can do is
prosecute it for
trespassing you can't prosecute him for
there's a separate statute for
trespassing on school property which is
broader it would include this building
but that statute has a loophole it says
unless you're here for a to attend a
meeting
it does anything about being armed so I
couldn't use that statute directly but I
can use the trespassing after forbidden
to do so and that requires you to either
tell somebody that they're violating it
and get out now and then they refuse and
get prosecuted or have it posted or give
them specific provable knowledge up
front by saying I talk to them
you know the night before the meeting
and said don't bring your gun to the
meeting because we've passed this
resolution and they bring It Anyway then
they're already a notice and they can be
prosecuted I'm not I'm not in favor of
Prosecuting people for for peacefully
carrying firearms uh but
I'm honored bound to follow the law and
if this is what you all want to do then
this is the only way we can enforce it
is what I want to make sure you
understood
I do want to ask a question yes sir Mr
Fisher yes so my clerk because I got
some text message on it today if I come
to a board of supervisor meeting all
Country School Board meet and bring a
firearm in here I am in violation unless
we pass this resolution to
make a
gun-free zone or if right now you as I
understand you've passed that resolution
and I've read the resolution that's how
I know it cited the wrong code section
even though it cites the proper language
from the proper code section
the resolutions in effect until you
change it so right now anybody that
comes in here with a gun can be is is
entering this building without your
permission
because you said you can't come in here
with a gun by this resolution
so if you rescind the resolution then
people can continue to bring firearms in
here and they're all everyone's always
subject to because the right to keeping
Barons although it is a fundamental
individual right recognized by our
constitution it's not a right to commit
violence
and so if you bring a gun in here and
brandish it you're going to get
prosecuted for branching a firearm if
you come in here and discharge that
firearm you're going to be charged
probably with a felony of discharging a
firearm within a building so as to
increase it caused a danger the people
in the building and that's a felony
event so nothing that you do affects our
ability to prosecute any of that whether
you have this resolution or not
but uh when you pass this resolution
you've you tie my hands to say this is
not a school building so I can't
prosecute them for the felony offense of
having a gun I can only prosecute them
for using I mean for trespassing for
coming in here without your permission
because they came in here armed and you
didn't get permission to come in your
arm you told them they can't come in
while they're armed which is a
misdemeanor it does not affect their gun
rights like a felony does but their gun
can be confiscated and held for evidence
until the trial is completed to prove
that it was a firearm that came in here
with and I
I'm not looking for extra crimes to
prosecute certainly not looking to
prosecute anybody for peacefully
carrying a firearm I prosecute quite a
number of people we just sentenced a guy
for murder today and using a firearm and
you know if you do that with a gun
you're going to get prosecuted
guaranteed we'll have to decide whether
we can make a case on trespassing but
you got to give them notice so if you
want to do this you need signs in my
opinion to make it easier for us but I'm
going to need somebody to come testify
as well that we the building's owned by
the school division the School Division
passed this resolution because I can't
offer the resolution it's not
self-authenticating I have to have
somebody coming and uh and testify this
is a resolution and that we own this
building
can I ask you a question absolutely are
we uh would we be in line to
say okay we've passed this can we delay
the Implement of it a couple two three
four months until we
gather some more information or
all right well let me preface by saying
this I'm not the school board's lawyer
obviously but I deal with legislative
issues because I'm on the board of
directors for the Virginia Associates
and I'm in Richmond quite a bit for our
legislative committee
legislatures are frequently
amending laws frequently overturning
laws frequently putting
Sunset Provisions into them where they
expire a certain period of time or
delaying or delaying enactment many of
the other Virginia General Assembly
statutes that they pass
in uh in January
or in February or March always have a
usually a July 1 start day because
that's the physical year sometimes the
delay the beginning of it until say
December 1st so I I I just said yes not
being your lawyer I would guess that you
have the ability to change your
resolution and change is an effective
enactment date if that's what you wish
to do
man-maker comment yes sir thank you from
my understanding we can vote to resend
it and bring it back up later if you
wish to do that and once you get
everything right
so you can resend it I don't know that
you can delay it now that it's been
signed
but I know that you can bring it back up
the one of the five that voted for it
would have to bring it back up it can be
rescinded and then
get some later date you think
everything's lower you can bring it up
again well I think we're going to have
to if we keep it we're going to have to
keep put the right code section in it
because we have got the wrong code
section
it does not affect my ability to
prosecute it yeah it makes it easier
because it takes away a foolish argument
that I got to deal with we need to fix
that yeah right
um and we would need to and and I think
Dr Jones has maintenance working on
signs already
because we knew that we were going to
need those
but I you know at this point I'm okay
either to rescind it or to delay it
until sometime early next year when we
can get all of this stuff in place
and and give people notice
so they can decide where they want to
still meet here or whatever
I don't know can we can we delay the
implementation that we need to send it
do you know to
and can we give it any form of a motion
to delay it well
I got a few questions I want to ask
before we go too far to make a motion
yeah it's not another user if you've
finished it but I hope to stay around I
got I'll Stick Around for any other
questions and listen again I'm not I
mean I may have a position as a private
citizen uh but as a Commonwealth
Attorney my role is
to stay in my Lane
you know govern some multi-lane Highway
and I I cross problems when I got on my
Lane my Lane is to make sure that I
properly advise the sheriff of the legal
issues involving enforcement of what
you've done and to let you know what can
and cannot be done about enforcement so
as you go forward consider whether you
want to maintain this or altered anyway
we need to get it right so whatever
whatever we need to do we just need to
make sure that we've caused our T's and
died in our eyes regardless of which way
we go
I'm sorry anyway
I'm sorry what
Mr Burton said something I didn't hear
him that brings me to some of the
questions I got
last month I abstained
the reason I abstained was I had asked
the chairman the day before that I had
some concerns that night he didn't have
answers to those
and and I said let's table this a month
so we can get some more information he
turned Mr Henderson Mr Anderson no we
need to do it right now
can you tell me the urgency and why how
we got to this that point
because he were a month later we were
still talking about it I'll tell you
when you and I go in closed session
tonight
when you and I can talk person to person
I'll tell you why I made the motion I'm
I'm not going to tell the group here
tonight I don't think it's relevant
but it's helped me understand the reason
help me understand
in the years I've been here what I can
remember I've never seen a time before
we come to a meeting and have an item on
the agenda without some explanation or
asking questions or have we checked in
on this and checked on that and talked
about the unintended consequences and
vote on it to make it and go into that
tonight
let me ask you this since you brought up
you've made the most I'm assuming that
you're the one brought it up
did you talk to anybody in the
supervisors or elected officials of
Commerce attorney the Sheriff's Office
to find out what would be
the what we'd have to do to implement
this
well first of all let me say I did not
just pull a rabbit out of the Hat okay
and say this is what I'm going to vote
on tonight I had discussed it with
several people not any of the Board of
Supervisors not anyone with the
sheriff's office or with the
Commonwealth attorney's office but I did
talk to some people and I'll be glad to
discuss that with you in private
I would just cut the either way private
or public but then George is not now
picking on you it's just well you have I
have operated for years and years in my
public life in the business in my church
life anywhere else
if I'm fixing to change something I'm
doing
and it's going to affect other people
they're going to know it before I decide
to do it
we are in my opinion what we did last
month and maybe not what we did but the
way we did it we're meddling in the
supervisors how they run their business
I don't want to do that
and I just made a suggestion a while ago
that why don't we delay this and rescind
it to we find out all the information
and make sure that we're right or wrong
whatever the case might be let's let's
delay it a while this is 30 days we have
we in my opinion have insulted some
folks
you folks on this board exceptionally
with Mr moon has never worked with a
governing body that wanted to control us
but we have
I can remember times when a supervisor
would call a board member or the
superintendent if you want me to support
your budget my buddy needs a job
we don't want to insult these folks
we're supposed to be working together
we don't want the message in the
community that we can't work together
so my my way of thinking all my life if
I'm going to do something in my life
that's going to change you I'm going to
talk to you about it face to face
beforehand
and I was told our superintendent was so
nice to reveal it to their County
Administrator and that the awful harm to
his relationship with somebody he needs
to work with every day and has nothing
to do with board action those two people
need to be opened and honest and that
reputation that has been damaged is by
the way we did things not what we did it
may be fine we may come back to that
but yeah in my opinion we can rescind
this thing tonight and then we can get
all the information together and do it
in a proper way if we want to do it and
and meet with the board of supervisor
before we do it Mr Burton apparently you
forgot what I said about 10 minutes ago
I'm willing to do that what's the right
way to do it
I don't want to get into a whole lot of
discussion because then you would have
to to name names or people would
understand who it was
but I can tell you that it came to my
attention
when I when I
did not understand the law I had the
superintendent go to my attorney
and what he gave me back was that we in
order to make all of our buildings
gun-free zones which I already thought
they were only to find out that they
were not
then we needed we need it as a board to
pass a resolution to make all of our
buildings gun-free zones
now we have students in a lot of these
buildings all the time
I don't really think we need a bunch of
gun carrying people in here we they're
not allowed in the schools and I don't
think they need to be allowed in
anything that we have or do
and that's my opinion and I'm gonna
that's my stance
students safety our staff safety this
man sits in this building over here and
he's not protected
anybody can walk in right now that
building's never protected
school is but these buildings are not
okay but I understand okay so that
that's that's how it that's how it got
to where it did is when it came to light
that these buildings were not part of
Pennsylvania County schools that are
included in gun-free zones because of
the complaints that I was getting from
from citizens of this County that there
was Guns being carried in our buildings
and they didn't understand how that
could happen
it didn't make sense to me that people
have had our conversation before that
are employed by the county will come
into the school board instead of talking
to their own administrators but to the
point you just made the only way in the
for what I understood
Brian to say if we're going to be really
safe about it then we're going to have
to put scanners at you 24 7. we don't do
that on a school semester no no you just
said but these people here this bill is
different School we've got people in
that but if you if if you indicated we
need to guarantee guarantee it it's the
only way to guarantee it in the school
is to do that
I just made it now I'm just talking
about now you that's what we want
to do but if we just want to pass a
resolution
if I understand you're right and then
somebody happens to come in and we do
the notification right
all we can do is prosecute them for a
trespassing that's correct yeah I just
wanted to make sure y'all understood
that was the limitation it's not a felon
so if if you're looking to scare
somebody and not bring a gun under the
theory that they're going to be
prosecuted for a felony I can't threaten
them with that because I have no
authority to do that yeah and I'll
certainly never threaten anybody with a
prosecution I cannot sustain so
and the whole the whole goal of
prosecution is that the innocent
shouldn't suffer for the crimes of the
guilty and if you wish to determine that
somebody is in violation
of your gun free ordinance that you that
you've passed outside of school zones
but including school property like this
then it's going to be have to be a
misdemeanor of trespass unless the
legislature
gives y'all the authority to do
something else or they change the
definition of the firearm on school
ground statute
okay so I thank you for letting me offer
to clarify this when I learned about it
the question always in law enforcement
is the legislative body has done this
what obligation does that put on us and
that's the question the sheriff and I
have been talking about to make sure
that we get it right
okay I have a question for you yes sir
even if this resolution had not been
passed it's still against the law to
branch of firearm correct it is
absolutely a crime anywhere to brandish
a firearm that is to point in the
statutory definition is point holder
brandish I mean obviously if I take the
gun and point it at you I'm scaring you
if I wave it around because I'm angry I
come up in here and say you're putting
my son in alternative school you know
and I'm angry and I'm waving a gun
around never pointing anybody that's
still brandishing
and that can cause the confiscation in a
particular firearm in a Class one
misdemeanor and a much higher likelihood
of going to jail because of the threat
involved in that as opposed to the
the lack of threat from someone who has
a lawful concealed carry permit and
comes in and doesn't threaten anybody
for example so yes
it does not I mean if if somebody goes
to school right now and shoots a teacher
God forbid or shoots a student they're
going to get prosecuted for not just
having a gun at school but they're going
to be prosecuted for the far more
punishable offenses of murder or
wounding depending on what they've done
in mandatory three years for using a
fire in the commission of those felonies
so you haven't stopped us from
Prosecuting I mean somebody comes in
here with a gun they're going to get
they're going to get prosecuted if they
make an ill use of that firearm because
you know
my personal belief is that the Second
Amendment recognizes a fundamental
individual right to keep and bear arms
that pre-existing the Constitution
but
it is not an absolute right it's not a
right to commit private violence and we
can prosecute you for that kind of
violence if you come in here and wave a
gun around
anywhere they if if they're bad and
confront you out on the street in front
of McDonald's because of some vote you
took tonight or some other night they'd
still be prosecuted for that
yeah
right I'm sorry there are plenty of
buildings that are gun free now
Federal buildings airports the
courthouse courthouse I mean so it's
yeah it's not it's not like this would
be the only building that's ever been no
and listen whether you agree with that
as a fundamental concept of individual
liberty or not that limitation on the
right to keep bear arms the United
States spring forward in the Heller
Decision
said that his decision which in my
opinion correctly recognized our
individual right to keep and bear arms
uh exists said that nothing prohibited
in their ruling prohibited uh the
maintenance of laws for sensitive areas
like schools of declaring them you know
gun prohibited zones our country zones
so I'm Bound by what the United States
Supreme Court rules as as are the limits
and expectations exceptions to our
fundamental rights
so the reason we're discussing this is
this building is not considered a school
but it is school building well so I mean
that's it whether it could be or
couldn't be uh is an argument we'd have
to make in court but by passing this
resolution and aiming it at this
building you've conclusively decided
that it is not
under that Federal definition because
you have no authority to do it if it's
already under the federal definition
so I mean it would be hard to yeah it
would be it would be difficult I would I
don't think I could win an argument this
is a school building I don't think you
could either
particularly when you're looking at
Prosecuting somebody for a felony yeah
central office building is a office
building exactly even though it's I mean
the statute is titled school property it
doesn't include everything the school
owns or leases
when I started getting all the phone
calls about the number of guns that was
in here and how could they do it and why
could they do it because it was a school
building yeah and that's that's because
the because we think that that statute
says you can't ever gone on school
property that's what everybody doesn't
stop too it's aimed and even that
statute has exceptions to it you could
have as a concealed weapon holder you
can have a firearm in your car when
you're coming up to pick up your child
as long as you don't get it out and wave
around at people or coming to building
with it
just fine students
filled all of our preschool evaluations
exactly where
and and that's why I think it's
important that this become a gun-free
zone because there's two sitting over
here right now right
they're students and all of us are not
necessarily the maintenance shop or
whatever but you know it's to protect
our people our buildings and our
property
and and because the law did not include
all of the buildings but but the law
says the board can include them if they
say the state law says that so and so
whether or not students are instructed
in this building or not it could have
maybe made it a school zone but when the
board that owns this building says we're
going to pass this resolution to declare
this our own gun free zone than by
definition you're saying it's not a
school because you can only do that if
it doesn't fit that Federal definition
which is
a school so so if the fed's defined as a
school and your Authority is to say
things Beyond this definition we can
declare and you say this building is now
declared by this resolution no matter
how many students you have in here for
how long or what you're doing with them
you've now said this is not a school and
so I could not use the the firearm on
school grounds statute for a felony
offense but I can't prosecute them for
for a trespass so if we said okay we're
gonna we're gonna rescind it and this
goes back and we say all right now this
is a school does that mean they can't
bring guns in here anytime I'm not I'm
not if you do if you you can't declare
it to be uh so so so there you go in
that sense you can declare it not to be
a school because the legislation said
you could right but otherwise the school
definition is based upon what what this
legislature statute says is a school
definition
I think it would be hard pressed to
prove that it was a school I might I
will confess I would have difficulty
with that I would have zero difficulty
at Chatham Elementary for example
um
it'll be hard here hard across the
street or the bus shop yeah certainly
certainly over in the admin building or
the bus bus depot I couldn't I couldn't
do it but where students are where my
kids went to school my kids have all
graduated and I think Pennsylvania
County schools for giving us such a
wonderful education let me throw that
out there uh because I'm a big believer
in public education my parents were
public Educators all their life my dad
was my principal at my high school at GW
when I was there so I I love public
education and we're here the sheriff is
here to help us protect the schools
uh whether this it's a definition or not
is moot while you have that that
enactment in place because you have said
that we have authority to clear this our
own gun for his own and therefore work
by default declaring it not to be a
school
and so I can't use a statutory
definition to say it is a school when
you say it isn't
all right
and again I take no position on what
you've done that's that's for you all to
decide I'm just here to tell you how we
have to react to whatever you do and the
implications of what you do for law
enforce's ability to enforce your desire
not to have guns in this building
which is the prosecutor after they're
given actual notice if we if we're so
inclined for it for the misdemeanor
trespass
I'll ask you this you might not want to
answer it but
I think the vast majority of mass
shootings take place
in gun-free zones
so in your opinion does making this a
gun-free zone actually make it any safer
well you're asking if you're asking us a
Commonwealth Attorney I can't take a
position on that because I'm somebody
who prosecutes the law if you asked was
a private citizen
um
my belief on Firearms is they are a tool
they enable the wielder or the carrier
or the possessor to greatly enhance
their ability to do good or evil
but it is the individual that does the
shooting not the gun because the
individual who commits the crime when
someone commits a crime mass shooting or
a single shooting we prosecute the
individual and not Smith and Wesson
or Glock or whoever it is because it's
the individual uh who who had the malice
in their heart to do something with a
gun that's what we've prosecuted whether
if there are no firearms present I will
say that uh that it makes it difficult
for anybody else to respond uh Firearms
make a firearm against an unarmed person
is an unequal fight I guarantee you that
um
several years ago one of our current
investigators was head of the soup of
security for Danville he did a school
tabletop discussion and I will tell you
that I went to that was greatly
impressed because it went very well done
and if you can give me just a moment to
address this uh the
I believe she was a teacher she might
have been the assistant principal as
Sandy Hook came and spoke she was the
only person who was shot at saying hook
and survived
and she came and looked and toured the
counties you know all the renovations we
did that my children greatly benefited
from with the high schools she said
congratulations you have the exact same
security that we had at Sandy Hook when
that shooting happened
the security buzz in and all that he
shot he took one shot collapsed the
glass and came in
he was in the building in five seconds
the only thing we have different is we
have resource officers who are armed
with a gun
and trained how to use it
and ordered to respond to that kind of a
shooting and hopefully since the board
has passed this we'll get some more
resource officers protect our children
because I think that's a that's a proper
use now whether whether you think we
should have armed conservatives of peace
or armed teachers that's something for
the legislature to decide
personally I would be in favor of it but
I'm the Commonwealth's Terry I only
prosecute the law and its violations
so I hope I answered your question I
can't take a position as your
Commonwealth's Attorney but as a public
citizen
I enjoy my right to keep bear arms
because there's a Rite of peaceful
possession
only
thank you
I'll just say what I said last month
putting sign ups not going to stop
somebody bringing a gun in here if they
want to use it
no it will make it easier for us to
prosecute them if they do for the
trespassing but yeah that's that's the
only that's that's the benefit of the
sign
Mr chairman I'll make one more comment
and I'll try to be quiet then make as
many as you want no
uh Well everybody's benefit I'm not
George I'm not trying to attack George
but the way my mind works one thing
leads to another when we say stuff and
I'm trying to connect it not so I
understand and I'll be glad to talk to
you when it means over with it that's
that's the reason I ask questions I do
all the time is because if we say
something one month and we do some the
same thing next month a different my
mind just gets confused so I'm always
trying to make things make sense to me
all right well we're as it stands now
the resolution is in effect and people
are prohibited from bringing guns to
tonight or any other night or any day
until you say otherwise but we have to
give them notice for prosecuting for the
trespassing
if you rescind it temporarily then guns
are allowed back in this building so
long as they're carried peacefully
as far as I can tell from how this
building is used
yes if we we have students in this field
and like for instance if we have
students tomorrow for Christmas dinner
what protects them from being exposed to
someone carrying a weapon in this
building right now your resolution does
in the sense that
to you know deterrence is is the only
thing that law can do and and Punishment
of those who violate it the deterrence
effect of what you've done is you can be
prosecuted for a Class one misdemeanor
and go to jail for 12 months and get a
500 2500 if you if if you are convinced
that that is enough to deter somebody
who's been on murder then that's your
decision I can't tell you if it will or
not I can only tell you that I can
prosecute them for it if they violate it
but you got to give them notice yes
that's the thing foreign
and you have to understand the sheriff's
office is not going to be lawfully
entitled to just pat down and search
everybody as they come in here like
they're going into the jail you know we
search inmates when when they arrest
them because we don't want them bringing
guns and drugs and weapons into the jail
but they have they have no right to
refuse that search when they're under
lawful arrest but the citizens who come
in here for the 10-year meetings are not
under lawful arrest and they can't
search them unless they have Reasonable
Suspicion they can do a pat down that
they're here in violation of some law
they can Pat them down for a weapon and
then seize the weapon if they feel it in
the bat down or you can put up scanners
uh like I mean the courthouse's ability
decision on that was to secure the
building to one entrance and have it
manned with an x-ray machine and a
scanner and have it banned anytime
someone come in and out of the building
that's an expensive proposition
if if that's the total security you want
that's one of the ways to get it I don't
have any entrances you have in this
building how many windows somebody can
get into uh I'm not a security expert
I said I'm gonna be about one more
comment I hope every board member and
School Board member if you have a
contact your representative On The Board
of Supervisors if we rescind this and to
delay it or whatever because your
working relationship with each one of
the board members is very important
so at least contact them let them know
where our thinking is and listen to what
they're thinking
all right all right any final thing I'll
say is anything y'all do does not affect
law enforcement like Steve who's out
here working security for us tonight
he's a law enforcement officer he can
always bring a firearm in here
but he's subject to all the other laws
we are too if he branches the firearm
because he's mad at somebody not that he
ever would because I know him too well
he could be prosecuted for branching a
firearm for example
so you're not going to limit the ability
of law enforcement to be armed in here
for security purposes by anything you do
well that's the reason you have them you
won't train people behind the gun not
not anybody well that's the that's the
ideal situation but yeah you know it
the world's not always ideal
anybody else
I thank you for your time if you don't
have any other questions look I
appreciate you taking your night to come
and speak to us this afternoon Enlighten
us on yeah on me anyway yeah as I said
I'm not your legal advisor I'm just
telling you with the Commonwealth
attorney's office can and can't do and
law enforce I can't and can't do uh
based on whatever y'all decide to do now
and in the future okay all right thank
you Brian thank you we appreciate it
anybody else
anybody want to do anything different
I I I would
my preference would be to
wait till March to enact it and give us
time to get signs up
to to talk to the Board of Supervisors
and let them decide how they want to go
forward but I still think it's important
that we protect our students we protect
our
workers and we protect our property and
I think that we need to
you know is it going to stop everybody
if somebody wants to be bad they're
going to be bad
it don't matter about the law but I
think it I think you would limit
people being in here that and and losing
their temper
if it didn't have it on them and lost
their temper then you they couldn't pull
it out that's what you try to protect
of course yes sir
we talk about the board of supervisor uh
we heard pushed back from them about
this
depends on which one you talk to not to
call them names that's why I said it
depends on which one you talk to
I think some are not happy with it some
I've talked to were okay with it so it
just depends on which ones you talk to
because I had never talked to all of
them I just know some of that I have
talked to I have not heard any warrant
now you know speak to me about it well
let me say this and I know the article
came out and started Tribune last week
or is it last week right over the week
over the weekend thank you
I have yet to get a call from a citizen
in this County
that's against making our property
gun-free zone not one call I have had
multiple multiple calls
from citizens and people saying it's the
right thing to do but I've yet to get
one call got one one email from a person
that thought it was infringing on their
Second Amendment right but I would bet
you to say I don't I don't believe that
it really is because there are other
buildings and other places in this
country that you're not allowed to carry
a gun
and and I don't the schools is one of
them this just happens to be a school
building that's not covered
so I'm not sure that you really
infringing on the right they can keep it
in a car come in and go out
just just we don't want it in here with
us I don't that's one reason we hear
from different people I've heard from
folks that think it's wrong you know
quite frankly what I saw on was started
viewing and I appreciate starts
reviewing writing the article weekend
because I got more information from
there than I did when we had our meeting
last month
so it is very important that if we do
something we do it correctly and take
time to think it through and look at the
unintended consequences and I cannot
make a motion because I abstain but if I
had my brothers
I would resend this and come back in our
work session or sometime and get
everything on it right and give a chance
for the public because a lot of people
didn't know about this thing until
yesterday
people told me said they just heard
about it so if it wasn't for the start
of you writing the article on Facebook I
think that's the only time they would
have known but I suspected you hear
anything it's probably going to be after
it comes out in the newspaper this week
or next week
I heard one supervisor said they didn't
know about the 21st of November we voted
on on the 8th
we can continue this on and on and on
and my motion is is to postpone any uh
Implement of this at least until our
March meeting perhaps you may want to go
to April I don't know but uh postpone
any
anything
huh I will suck on that
to March March okay I got a motion to
postpone the implementation to March and
a second
anybody have any discussion roll call Mr
Burton I'll vote for that
I'm sorry yes Mr Fitzgerald yes Mr
Henderson yes Miss Merricks Mr Mills Mr
Burns did you vote
I thought he said no he said yes can I
vote Yes
time to talk about it all right yes Mr
Mills yes Mr Mayor Mr Donald yeah
hi thank y'all
tell you Mr Haskins I appreciate y'all's
time for trying to help clear this up
um I don't wait any better off now than
we were other than a week's a little
smarter about it right a little more
about about at least the prosecution
piece of it thank you
you'll appreciate it
and our final item as our school board
work session one of the dates was
January 31st that is the legislative
conference in Richmond I know that date
won't work
24th January 24th on a Tuesday night
with y'all
don't have a motion for that
yeah I'll make a motion all right motion
second second
January 24th what time five to nine five
to nine
no no
this is a work session okay
okay
Mr Burton
yes Mr Fitzgerald yes Mr Henderson yes
Miss Merricks Mr Mills yeah Mr Moon Mr
Dallas yes I will entertain a motion
second roll call
Burton Mr Fitzgerald Mr Henderson yes
Miss Merricks yes Mr Mills aye Mr Moon
Mr dolls nice